ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In May 2013, as I sat in that hotel room in Hong Kong wondering whether any journalis
ts would show up to meet me, I’d never felt more alone. Six years later, I find myse
lf in quite the opposite situation, having been welcomed into an extraordinary and ev
er-expanding global tribe of journalists, lawyers, technologists, and human rights ad
vocates to whom I owe an incalculable debt. At the conclusion of a book, it’s tradit
ional for an author to thank the people who helped make the book possible, and I cert
ainly intend to do that here, but given the circumstances I’d be remiss if I didn’t
 also thank the people who have helped make my life possible—by advocating for my fr
eedom and, especially, by working ceaselessly and selflessly to protect our open soci
eties as well as the technologies that have brought us, and that bring everyone, toge
ther.
Over the last nine months, Joshua Cohen has taken me to writing school, helping to tr
ansform my rambling reminiscences and capsule manifestos into a book that I hope he c
an be proud of.
Chris Parris-Lamb proved himself a shrewd and patient agent, while Sam Nicholson prov
ided astute and clarifying edits and support, as did the entire team at Metropolitan,
 from Gillian Blake to Sara Bershtel, Riva Hocherman, and Grigory Tovbis.
The success of this team is a testament to its members’ talents, and to the talents 
of the man who assembled it—Ben Wizner, my lawyer, and, I am honored to say, my frie
nd.
In the same vein, I’d like to thank my international team of lawyers who have worked
 tirelessly to keep me free. I would also like to thank Anthony Romero, the ACLU’s d
irector, who embraced my cause at a time of considerable political risk for the organ
ization, along with the other ACLU staff who have helped me throughout the years, inc
luding Bennett Stein, Nicola Morrow, Noa Yachot, and Daniel Kahn Gillmor.
Additionally, I’d like to acknowledge the work of Bob Walker, Jan Tavitian, and thei
r team at the American Program Bureau, who have allowed me to make a living by spread
ing my message to new audiences around the world.
Trevor Timm and my fellow board members at the Freedom of the Press Foundation have p
rovided the space and resources for me to return to my true passion, engineering for 
social good. I am especially grateful to our CTO Micah Lee, former FPF operations man
ager Emmanuel Morales, and current FPF board member Daniel Ellsberg, who has given th
e world the model of his rectitude, and given me the warmth and candor of his friends
hip.
This book was written using free and open-source software. I would like to thank the 
Qubes Project, the Tor Project, and the Free Software Foundation.
My earliest intimations of what it was like to write against deadline came from the m
asters, Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, Ewen Macaskill, and Bart Gellman, whose profe
ssionalism is informed by a passionate integrity. Having been edited now myself, I ha
ve gained a new appreciation of their editors, who refused to be intimidated and took
 the risks that gave meaning to their principles.
My deepest gratitude is reserved for Sarah Harrison.
And my heart belongs to my family, extended and immediate—to my father, Lon, to my m
other, Wendy, and to my brilliant sister, Jessica.
The only way I can end this book is the way I began it: with a dedication to Lindsay,
 whose love makes life out of exile.
