Preface
My name is Edward Joseph Snowden. I used to work for the government, but now I work f
or the public. It took me nearly three decades to recognize that there was a distinct
ion, and when I did, it got me into a bit of trouble at the office. As a result, I no
w spend my time trying to protect the public from the person I used to be—a spy for 
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and National Security Agency (NSA), just anothe
r young technologist out to build what I was sure would be a better world.
My career in the American Intelligence Community (IC) only lasted a short seven years
, which I’m surprised to realize is just one year longer than the time I’ve spent s
ince in exile in a country that wasn’t my choice. During that seven-year stint, howe
ver, I participated in the most significant change in the history of American espiona
ge—the change from the targeted surveillance of individuals to the mass surveillance
 of entire populations. I helped make it technologically feasible for a single govern
ment to collect all the world’s digital communications, store them for ages, and sea
rch through them at will.
After 9/11, the IC was racked with guilt for failing to protect America, for letting 
the most devastating and destructive attack on the country since Pearl Harbor occur o
n its watch. In response, its leaders sought to build a system that would prevent the
m from being caught off guard ever again. At its foundation was to be technology, a f
oreign thing to their army of political science majors and masters of business admini
stration. The doors to the most secretive intelligence agencies were flung wide open 
to young technologists like myself. And so the geek inherited the earth.
If I knew anything back then, I knew computers, so I rose quickly. At twenty-two, I g
ot my first top secret clearance from the NSA, for a position at the very bottom of t
he org chart. Less than a year later, I was at the CIA, as a systems engineer with sp
rawling access to some of the most sensitive networks on the planet. The only adult s
upervision was a guy who spent his shifts reading paperbacks by Robert Ludlum and Tom
 Clancy. The agencies were breaking all of their own rules in their quest to hire tec
hnical talent. They’d normally never hire anybody without a bachelor’s degree, or l
ater at least an associate’s, neither of which I had. By all rights, I should never 
have even been let into the building.
From 2007 to 2009, I was stationed at the US Embassy in Geneva as one of the rare tec
hnologists deployed under diplomatic cover, tasked with bringing the CIA into the fut
ure by bringing its European stations online, digitizing and automating the network b
y which the US government spied. My generation did more than reengineer the work of i
ntelligence; we entirely redefined what intelligence was. For us, it was not about cl
andestine meetings or dead drops, but about data.
By age twenty-six, I was a nominal employee of Dell, but once again working for the N
SA. Contracting had become my cover, as it was for nearly all the tech-inclined spies
 of my cohort. I was sent to Japan, where I helped to design what amounted to the age
ncy’s global backup—a massive covert network that ensured that even if the NSA’s h
eadquarters was reduced to ash in a nuclear blast, no data would ever be lost. At the
 time, I didn’t realize that engineering a system that would keep a permanent record
 of everyone’s life was a tragic mistake.
I came back to the States at age twenty-eight, and received a stratospheric promotion
 to the technical liaison team handling Dell’s relationship with the CIA. My job was
 to sit down with the heads of the technical divisions of the CIA in order to design 
and sell the solution to any problem that they could imagine. My team helped the agen
cy build a new type of computing architecture—a “cloud,” the first technology that
 enabled every agent, no matter where they were physically located, to access and sea
rch any data they needed, no matter the distance.
In sum, a job managing and connecting the flow of intelligence gave way to a job figu
ring out how to store it forever, which in turn gave way to a job making sure it was 
universally available and searchable. These projects came into focus for me in Hawaii
, where I moved to take a new contract with the NSA at the age of twenty-nine. Up unt
il then, I’d been laboring under the doctrine of Need to Know, unable to understand 
the cumulative purpose behind my specialized, compartmentalized tasks. It was only in
 paradise that I was finally in a position to see how all my work fit together, meshi
ng like the gears of a giant machine to form a system of global mass surveillance.
Deep in a tunnel under a pineapple field—a subterranean Pearl Harbor–era former air
plane factory—I sat at a terminal from which I had practically unlimited access to t
he communications of nearly every man, woman, and child on earth who’d ever dialed a
 phone or touched a computer. Among those people were about 320 million of my fellow 
American citizens, who in the regular conduct of their everyday lives were being surv
eilled in gross contravention of not just the Constitution of the United States, but 
the basic values of any free society.
The reason you’re reading this book is that I did a dangerous thing for a man in my 
position: I decided to tell the truth. I collected internal IC documents that gave ev
idence of the US government’s lawbreaking and turned them over to journalists, who v
etted and published them to a scandalized world.
This book is about what led up to that decision, the moral and ethical principles tha
t informed it, and how they came to be—which means that it’s also about my life.
What makes a life? More than what we say; more, even, than what we do. A life is also
 what we love, and what we believe in. For me, what I love and believe in the most is
 connection, human connection, and the technologies by which that is achieved. Those 
technologies include books, of course. But for my generation, connection has largely 
meant the Internet.
Before you recoil, knowing well the toxic madness that infests that hive in our time,
 understand that for me, when I came to know it, the Internet was a very different th
ing. It was a friend, and a parent. It was a community without border or limit, one v
oice and millions, a common frontier that had been settled but not exploited by diver
se tribes living amicably enough side by side, each member of which was free to choos
e their own name and history and customs. Everyone wore masks, and yet this culture o
f anonymity-through-polyonymy produced more truth than falsehood, because it was crea
tive and cooperative rather than commercial and competitive. Certainly, there was con
flict, but it was outweighed by goodwill and good feelings—the true pioneering spiri
t.
You will understand, then, when I say that the Internet of today is unrecognizable. I
t’s worth noting that this change has been a conscious choice, the result of a syste
matic effort on the part of a privileged few. The early rush to turn commerce into e-
commerce quickly led to a bubble, and then, just after the turn of the millennium, to
 a collapse. After that, companies realized that people who went online were far less
 interested in spending than in sharing, and that the human connection the Internet m
ade possible could be monetized. If most of what people wanted to do online was to be
 able to tell their family, friends, and strangers what they were up to, and to be to
ld what their family, friends, and strangers were up to in return, then all companies
 had to do was figure out how to put themselves in the middle of those social exchang
es and turn them into profit.
This was the beginning of surveillance capitalism, and the end of the Internet as I k
new it.
Now, it was the creative Web that collapsed, as countless beautiful, difficult, indiv
idualistic websites were shuttered. The promise of convenience led people to exchange
 their personal sites—which demanded constant and laborious upkeep—for a Facebook p
age and a Gmail account. The appearance of ownership was easy to mistake for the real
ity of it. Few of us understood it at the time, but none of the things that we’d go 
on to share would belong to us anymore. The successors to the e-commerce companies th
at had failed because they couldn’t find anything we were interested in buying now h
ad a new product to sell.
That new product was Us.
Our attention, our activities, our locations, our desires—everything about us that w
e revealed, knowingly or not, was being surveilled and sold in secret, so as to delay
 the inevitable feeling of violation that is, for most of us, coming only now. And th
is surveillance would go on to be actively encouraged, and even funded by an army of 
governments greedy for the vast volume of intelligence they would gain. Aside from lo
g-ins and financial transactions, hardly any online communications were encrypted in 
the early twenty-aughts, which meant that in many cases governments didn’t even need
 to bother approaching the companies in order to know what their customers were doing
. They could just spy on the world without telling a soul.
The American government, in total disregard of its founding charter, fell victim to p
recisely this temptation, and once it had tasted the fruit of this poisonous tree it 
became gripped by an unrelenting fever. In secret, it assumed the power of mass surve
illance, an authority that by definition afflicts the innocent far more than the guil
ty.
It was only when I came to a fuller understanding of this surveillance and its harms 
that I became haunted by the awareness that we the public—the public of not just one
 country but of all the world—had never been granted a vote or even a chance to voic
e our opinion in this process. The system of near-universal surveillance had been set
 up not just without our consent, but in a way that deliberately hid every aspect of 
its programs from our knowledge. At every step, the changing procedures and their con
sequences were kept from everyone, including most lawmakers. To whom could I turn? Wh
o could I talk to? Even to whisper the truth, even to a lawyer or a judge or to Congr
ess, had been made so severe a felony that just a basic outlining of the broadest fac
ts would invite a lifetime sentence in a federal cell.
I was lost, and fell into a dark mood while I struggled with my conscience. I love my
 country, and I believe in public service—my whole family, my whole family line for 
centuries, is filled with men and women who have spent their lives serving this count
ry and its citizens. I myself had sworn an oath of service not to an agency, nor even
 a government, but to the public, in support and defense of the Constitution, whose g
uarantee of civil liberties had been so flagrantly violated. Now I was more than part
 of that violation: I was party to it. All of that work, all of those years—who was 
I working for? How was I to balance my contract of secrecy with the agencies that emp
loyed me and the oath I’d sworn to my country’s founding principles? To whom, or wh
at, did I owe the greater allegiance? At what point was I morally obliged to break th
e law?
Reflecting on those principles brought me my answers. I realized that coming forward 
and disclosing to journalists the extent of my country’s abuses wouldn’t be advocat
ing for anything radical, like the destruction of the government, or even of the IC. 
It would be a return to the pursuit of the government’s, and the IC’s, own stated i
deals.
The freedom of a country can only be measured by its respect for the rights of its ci
tizens, and it’s my conviction that these rights are in fact limitations of state po
wer that define exactly where and when a government may not infringe into that domain
 of personal or individual freedoms that during the American Revolution was called “
liberty” and during the Internet Revolution is called “privacy.”
It’s been six years since I came forward because I witnessed a decline in the commit
ment of so-called advanced governments throughout the world to protecting this privac
y, which I regard—and the United Nations regards—as a fundamental human right. In t
he span of those years, however, this decline has only continued as democracies regre
ss into authoritarian populism. Nowhere has this regression been more apparent than i
n the relationship of governments to the press.
The attempts by elected officials to delegitimize journalism have been aided and abet
ted by a full-on assault on the principle of truth. What is real is being purposefull
y conflated with what is fake, through technologies that are capable of scaling that 
conflation into unprecedented global confusion.
I know this process intimately enough, because the creation of irreality has always b
een the Intelligence Community’s darkest art. The same agencies that, over the span 
of my career alone, had manipulated intelligence to create a pretext for war—and use
d illegal policies and a shadow judiciary to permit kidnapping as “extraordinary ren
dition,” torture as “enhanced interrogation,” and mass surveillance as “bulk coll
ection”—didn’t hesitate for a moment to call me a Chinese double agent, a Russian 
triple agent, and worse: “a millennial.”
They were able to say so much, and so freely, in large part because I refused to defe
nd myself. From the moment I came forward to the present, I was resolute about never 
revealing any details of my personal life that might cause further distress to my fam
ily and friends, who were already suffering enough for my principles.
It was out of a concern for increasing that suffering that I hesitated to write this 
book. Ultimately, the decision to come forward with evidence of government wrongdoing
 was easier for me to make than the decision, here, to give an account of my life. Th
e abuses I witnessed demanded action, but no one writes a memoir because they’re una
ble to resist the dictates of their conscience. This is why I have tried to seek the 
permission of every family member, friend, and colleague who is named, or otherwise p
ublicly identifiable, in these pages.
Just as I refuse to presume to be the sole arbiter of another’s privacy, I never tho
ught that I alone should be able to choose which of my country’s secrets should be m
ade known to the public and which should not. That is why I disclosed the government
’s documents only to journalists. In fact, the number of documents that I disclosed 
directly to the public is zero.
I believe, just as those journalists believe, that a government may keep some informa
tion concealed. Even the most transparent democracy in the world may be allowed to cl
assify, for example, the identity of its undercover agents and the movements of its t
roops in the field. This book includes no such secrets.
To give an account of my life while protecting the privacy of my loved ones and not e
xposing legitimate government secrets is no simple task, but it is my task. Between t
hose two responsibilities—that is where to find me.
